# Movie_Database
COMP 2406 project movie database
Movie Database Project Final Report Eric Tran & Adrian Cheung

PURPOSE: For our COMP2406 project we decided on doing the movie database. The purpose of our website was to replicate something reminiscent of IMDB where users would have accounts where they would be able to search, view, and review movies of their choice.

FUNCTIONALITY: Our movie database has provided most if not all of the basic functionality that was required of the specifications with the exception of a database as that was omitted as an absolute requirement and is now treated as an extension. Our movie database firstly runs off of express and incorporates sessions into our database. We have made the design decision to only allow only individuals who have created and logged into our database to view / get / post data with the exception of post requests to logging in or creating an account. Our authorization checks for each request the user makes and if the session is not recognized, then the individual will not be allowed to access our database.

USERS: We have created users in such a way such that individuals who register for our database must have a unique username. In addition, usernames we have included another category of accounts that we refer to as ‘People’. People accounts include the actors, writers, and directors which our users will be able to follow/unfollow as well as view the person’s actor names are completely separated and as a result, we have made the design decision to allow users for example to name themselves Michael Bay or some other famous director. This is not a hindrance however, as the database will be able to recognize the types of object that name is and will not interfere with the creation or logging in functionality of our database. In addition to creating an account. Users who created an account will also be given the option to upload their personal profile picture if sending a proper post request to the database. The option for a profile picture to be added will include sending an appropriate link to a photo that will then be grabbed from the internet and used as their profile picture. Profile pictures as a result will also be cropped to fit a circle in order to fit with the look and theme of our overall aesthetic of our database. Profile pictures on default will be a generic black profile picture. Users will have the option to access almost completely everything inside the database given they are non-contributing users. This includes being able to view and follow individuals, receive notifications whenever a new movie / review comes out depending if they are following a user (reviews will be posted and new movies uploaded by them will be posted), actors and other movie persons can also be followed, and you will receive notifications if they are added to a new movie or existing movie. Users will also be notified if they are being followed (Similar to applications like Instagram) users can then navigate through their account and as a result, follow them back.

Users can also have the option to enable their account to be a contributing user. Contributing users will have the ability to edit and create new movies as well as add actors into the existing database. This like the specification says, only affects their ability during the time they are or not a contributing user. Disabling the option later on will have no effect on their movies that have added or edited beforehand.

Users will be given a dedicated page on the database, and as a result, you can publicly wish to view any user by pressing their profile and or pressing the next and previous buttons on the website. Like mentioned earlier, currently, all users are public, and anyone can see their following and follower count as well as the movies that they have reviewed. We have had to make a design decision in this section of the project. Since the specification did not mention any possibility of viewing other users, we decided to not implement the ability for other users to view the specific followers or following of another individual.

Users will also have the ability to generate an assortment of chosen recommended movies. The algorithm that was chosen based on deciding if a movie is to be recommended was if they are in the same genre as movies they have reviewed, or if the actors in that movie have been spotted in other movies as well. There will be a limit as to which movies have been picked. Users who are logged in will also have the ability to search movies by title and or genre and or year of the release date. We have created a query parser that will take parameters from the URL and use this information to go through the database and search for movies that have met this criteria.

An example of searching for a movie could include: localhost:3000/movies?title=toy&genre=family this will allow the individual to see the movie toy story. In addition to searching movies by title and or genre, if you wish to view a specific page, one can have the query ?page=2 this will send you to the second page of your search results. Search results are read sequentially as a design decision in order to generate a consistent and testable data. We have decided not to generate these results asynchronously although that would be the obvious better alternative, but the specifications did not specify how movies were to be searched.

In addition to searching movie titles, the user will also be able to navigate to the movie page for any of the search results by simply clicking on their posters. Users also have the ability to search for actors, directors, and writers in addition to searching for a movie. However, one issue is that the people objects do not have a profile picture due to the limited data provided to us in the .json file. The content inside what actors pertain and also what movies will pertain will be included into the following respective statements. Viewing movies

When a user views a specific movie. We have included the following content on that movie page: Rating of the movie, release date, running time, genres it belongs to, director writer and actors, awards and as well as the plot, title, picture of the movie poster if provided one, and also a custom review section of the movie (this is where all of the user generated reviews will be shown)

Users will be able to navigate through movie results using query parameters and can currently search a movie by its minimum rating, maximum rating, title, genre qualities (please see min and max specs for more details for design decisions). In addition to searching a movie based on these parameters, if a user actually knows the id of a given movie, then the client can simply copy and paste the URL of that specific movie into the search bar. This will then gather the movie if it exists or if it does not exist. Due to the server generator that we have created, all ids for movies will be uniquely identifiable and can be traced back to a specific movie if that given id exist.

Directors, writers, actors are also given each their own unique hyperlink when shown on a movie page. When pressing on these links, it will guide you to the specific person. There you can see the works that the actor or person has created, and you will also be given the option to follow that individual.

Movie reviews that have been added to a movie are publicly available and shared on a page. This will include its star rating, the string of the long movie review, and also the user who created the movie review. Users will be able to score movies out of 10 stars and also be able to create a long review as well. In order to populate out site we used faker.js to generate our review and a star rating generator that created a large number of reviews for movies.

VIEWING PEOPLE OBJECTS: This section is somewhat mentioned above, due to the page limit of this final write up, I may fail to include some of the information above as it has been already mentioned.

Viewing people (i.e. non users) will be shown on a dedicated page of the respective person. Each person is given a unique id and cannot be mixed up with another individual. For the purposes of this project, we have assumed that an individual’s name is completely unique, and as a result, no duplicates can be found in our database. Each movie that they have worked with will be included in their works section and a recommended actors / frequent collaborators can be shown. This is simply an algorithm that goes through the list of movies and if another individual has starred in the same movie as them, then they will be added and featured. Users will also have the ability to follow this user and receive notifications upon this as well.

CONTRIBUTING USERS: Contributing users are a bit different compared to a regular user. A boolean value is used to determine whether or not a user is contributing or not. Contributing users will have the ability to create their own movies or edit a movie and also add additional people into the database provided that the name is unique and does not exist already. We will talk about creating a movie later below. Contributing users’ movies and reviews will not be affected if they are revoked of that status like mentioned before. A user can be chosen to be contributing if they simply press a button which switches their boolean value from false to true.

REST API: In addition to creating a website that users can view, we can also provide the data for certain objects inside our database if requested.

Get/movies will return the array of movies that matches the query parameters, due to having pages, we have implemented this design feature as not to give out all 300 movies at once, I believe the current implementation we have gave the user 21 movies to look at. All the information of the movie will be shown including information not shown on the website. This information is directly drawn from the JSON data we are provided with at the beginning of the term. Like mentioned above with our query parameters, movies can accept certain query parameters as well as have pages, and also a unique identifier to tell people apart Post/movies will send data to the database, if all of the constraints for a movie is found and the movie is unique (we are assuming unique titles only), then the movie will be added to the database, please see above for more information

Getting users and people, just like mentioned above the information that goes further in depth can be found in their respective sections. For keeping this write up brief as possible, some important key points is that we are able to search for individuals with a query parameter, not query parameter, and with certain pages. Currently, users can be searched via their name and nonusers can be searched via their name and also the works that they have done. All users and people are given a unique id, no mix-up can be possible.

EXTENSIONS:

Flexbox is an addition to CSS where everything scales nicely in order to fit the screen of whatever you are viewing the database from. You can find that from a variety of screen sizes (not just 720p), that the application works nicely and will fit on the display that you are viewing from. This is because of the flexbox model and scaling everything relative to the screen. This works really well for anything until up to a ridiculously small screen size as then it will have some resolution issues. Try it!

Some smaller additional extensions that we have included are visually impressive CSS. We have spent a lot of time perfecting the look of the website and we feel like it should be appreciated in its entirety. We have imported some themes from outside of our project and in addition, we have implemented this “circular” theme of the website where profile pictures and even parts of the main menu are circled off. We think that by doing this, we can have a more modern look on our website and imitate the look of some modern social media such as Facebook. We have also implemented some extra features that were not required a profile picture for each user with an option to change it. Buttons in addition “glow” when they are hovered over, and the navigation bar shoes exactly which part of the website you are on. For example, if I am in the section users, the user’s section of the navigation bar will be a different color.

DESIGN DECISIONS:

Although this project was very freely designed and lots of interpretations were allowed at certain points throughout the project, we have decided to mention or reinforce certain design decisions that we have made for the project that one should be aware of if using the database. Firstly, we have created this database on the assumption that users with an account are able to access the database. We have made this design decision as the specifications specify that individuals with an account can access the database.

We have also made the design decision to not include a database into our “database” although this used to be a strict requirement, it was removed following modifications of the project specifications. All data is currently locally stored in RAM, which can lead to some scalability issues, we will talk about this more in the section below about improvements.

In my opinion, the design decisions we have made to create a more user-friendly experience has been a positive. We have chosen a nice darker theme that is more friendly to the eyes as well as creating some not so sharp looking pages by rounding off the corners and making the page visually appealing to the eyes. By having a better-looking website, then users would be more likely to return to the website and stay longer. The addition of also showing followers and following like Instagram may also be a benefit for younger demographics. The idea of a movie database looking like social media will allow people to familiarize themselves easier with the database and encourage more use out of it.

The scalability of the server is pretty impressive as well. It was tested and asked that our database can handle from 10 movies being in the database or 9000. We have done this by allowing the reading and writing of json data from a external source. By modifying the json data and its length, we can have incredible base levels of information that is available to generate and be shown on the website. Although databases are more efficient, the sole ease of having json data simply being set up correctly and fed into the server as a generator is a major benefit. AJAX requests are being used to send and receive data without loading the page again. This will enhance user experience as it will simply just grab and retrieve whatever data they are requesting without the downsides of refreshing the page. This allows for smarter programming and also a better experience overall.

Pages were implemented in our database, in order to cut down on the data being sent and retrieved and the possibility of data being lost or corrupted in a real-life scenario, we have decided to have a limit on the amount of data being sent. This however is still scalable as simply changing the page number will allow you to navigate through and to a specific page using query parameters if one allows it.

Some conflicting information has been found in the specifications of the movie database. There was a mention of if you are creating a movie and the actor did not exist in the database, then that movie should not be added. However, in another section, it mentioned that if a movie is to be created, then if that actor should not be created. For simplicity sake, we have just interpreted that as not allowing an invalid movie to be created if that actor does not exist in the database.

IMPROVEMENTS TO THE SYSTEM:

Database: The obvious answer to our project being improved upon is the inclusion of a database and not storing all of our data into ram. Databases are a great addition to any project and make accessing as well as finding information much easier than arrays. Databases such as mongoDB come included with unique identifiers as well as some great functionality such as finding very specific data within the database. In addition to Mongo, we had pondered with the idea of including Mongoose to our database, an extension of mongo as well. But however, due to time, we were not able to implement all of it within 1 week and we were forced to use what we have proven to work so far. Databases are almost pretty much superior in terms of ability compared to what we have done with our project so far. As well as the advantages above mentioned, databases work with a variety of other different languages. If were to switch something fundamental in our project, assuming the database has not been touched, the information inside the database will be exactly the same and safe. Databases are meant for storing large amounts of data and it does it very well. As I’m sure you know, ram is a very limited resource in a computer, and storing 9000 movies on it is not a very particular elegant solution, if the project were any larger, we may run out of memory. Databases access data from inside the STORAGE of your computer, so this concern does not exist.

CSS: We have wished that we have implemented a better-looking CSS into our project. Although I believe that the CSS in our project is impressive, we are still missing some aspects that allow for truly amazing CSS. things such as 3D looking backgrounds that change as you scroll or animations of certain kinds or a light and dark mode feature are one that we have wished to implement in our project but was unable to due to time constraints. Due to both of the partners in this project never having done web development before, we wished we looked further into CSS and HTML in this course.

REACT: In order to make our frontend look even better and have more modular and reusable code, we regret not having implemented REACT into our work. React is a front end-based software/program that allows for the creation of user interfaces. It allows for more code to be written in less time essentially and allows for the creation of some truly impressive web applications on the front end. We did not dive deep into looking at react due to time constraints, but we wish to have implemented something that will allow our front end to be even better than now.

MODULES:

Modules that are required for this project include express, sessions, unique ids, faker, and pug.

BONUS FUNCTIONALITIES:

The Genres page accept multiple queries of genres and parse them together allowing for a user to generate a list of movies containing multiple genres. If we had for example want to filter movies that contained both horror and comedy, then it would do exactly that.

An additional file called moviedatabase-generator.js was created to initially set up roughly 600 accounts with unique profile pictures, names, passwords, and reviews. This was done thanks to a custom function that took pictures from a .json file curtesy of picsum which gave each account a completely unique avatar. The faker.js module was used to generate the names and passwords and with the custom review generator mentioned previously the accounts were given life. We decided on this as we believed with the added accounts it would make the website seem more lively instead of an empty site with only 2-3 testing accounts

What do we like most about the project?

I think the most enjoyment we had was seeing how slowly over time the frontend and backend became connected. Seeing our website slowly develop from static HTML pages to the (almost completed) final product was very satisfying. Another thing that we enjoyed was how the project held your hand throughout the whole ordeal. We were not immediately thrown into the deep end and expected to use advanced techniques but instead slowly built up our knowledge base.

Our best feature of our project is our CSS and overall design. We tried to make it so that everything on our website was easily accessible to make it user friendly. We also included a lot of minor details like having our navigation bar be selected at relevant pages. Ex: searching for a user would make the navigation bar select the “User” tab. We believe our website is very cohesive and the transition between pages is very smooth visually.
